Who meets us here?
Daughter, well met.
God give your graces both
a happy and a joyful timeof day.
As much to you, goodsister.
Whither away?
No farther than the Tower
and as I guess, upon thelike devotion as yourselves:
to gratulate the gentleprinces there.
Kind sister, thanks.
We'll enter all together.
And in good time, here thelieutenant comes.
Master lieutenant, prayyou, by your leave,
how doth the prince and myyoung son of York?
Right well, dear madam.
By your patience,
I may not suffer you tovisit them.
The king hath strictlycharged the contrary.
The king?
Who's that?
I mean the lord protector.
The Lord protect him fromthat kingly title.
Hath he set bounds betweentheir love and me?
I am their mother.
Who shall bar me fromthem?
I am their father'smother.
I will see them.
Their aunt I am in law, inlove their mother.
Then bring me to theirsights.
I'll bear thy blame
and take thy office fromthee, on my peril.
No, madam, no.
I may not leave it so.
I am bound by oath,
and therefore pardon me.
Let me but greet you,ladies, one hour hence,
and I'll salute your graceof York as mother
and reverend looker-on oftwo fair queens.
Come, madam, you muststraight to Westminster,
there to be crownedRichard's royal queen.
O, cut my lace asunder
that my pent heart mayhave some scope to beat,
or else I swoon with thisdead-killing news.
Be of good cheer, Mother.
How fares your grace?
O Dorset, speak not to me.Get thee gone.
Death and destruction dogsthee at the heels.
Thy mother's name isominous to children.
If thou wilt outstripdeath, go cross the seas
and live with Richmondfrom the reach of hell.
Go! Hie thee.
Hie thee from thisslaughterhouse,
lest thou increase thenumber of the dead
and make me die the thrallof Margaret's curse,
nor mother, wife, norEngland's counted queen!
Full of wise care is thisyour counsel, madam.
Take all the swiftadvantage of the hours.
You shall have lettersfrom me to my son
in your behalf to meet youon the way.
Be not ta'en tardy byunwise delay.
O ill-dispersing wind ofmisery.
O my accursed womb, thebed of death.
A cockatrice hast thouhatched to the world
whose unavoided eye ismurderous.
Come, madam, come. I inall haste was sent.
And I with allunwillingness will go.
Oh, would to God that theinclusive verge of goldenmetal
that must round my browwere red-hot steel
to sear me to the brains.
Anointed let me be withdeadly venom
and die ere men can say"God save the queen."
Go, go, poor soul.
I envy not thy glory.
To feed my humor, wishthyself no harm.
No.
Why?
When he that is my husbandnow
came to me as I followedHenry's corse
when scarce the blood waswell-washed from his hands
which issued from my otherangel husband
and that dear saint whichthen I, weeping, followed.
O, when I say I look'd onRichard's face,
this was my wish:
"Be thou," quoth I,
"accursed for making me,so young, so old a widow.
"And when thou wed'st, letsorrow haunt thy bed.
"And be thy wife, if anybe so mad,
"more miserable by thelife of thee
than thou hast made me bymy dear lord's death."
Lo, ere I can repeat thiscurse again
within so small a time,
my woman's heart grossly grewcaptive to his honey words
and proved the subject ofmine own soul's curse,
which hitherto hath heldmy eyes from rest.
For never yet one hour inhis bed
did I enjoy the golden dewof sleep
but with his timorousdreams was still awaked.
Besides, he hates me formy father, Warwick,
and will no doubt shortlybe rid of me.
Poor heart, adieu.
I pity thy complaining.
No more than with my soulI mourn for yours.
Farewell, thou woefulwelcomer of glory.
Adieu, poor soul thattakest thy leave of it.
Go thou to Richmond, andgood fortune guide thee.
Go thou to Richard, andgood angels tend thee.
Go thou to sanctuary, andgood thoughts possess thee.
I to my grave, where peaceand rest lie with me.
Stay.
Yet look back with me untothe Tower.
Pity, you ancient stones,those tender babes
whom envy hath immuredwithin your walls.
Rough cradle for suchlittle pretty ones.
Rude ragged nurse,
old sullen playfellow fortender princes,
use my babies well.
So foolish sorrow bidsyour stones farewell.
Stand all apart!
Cousin of Buckingham.
My gracious sovereign.
Give me thy hand.
Thus high, by thy adviceand thy assistance,
is King Richard seated.
But shall we wear theseglories for a day,
or shall they last and werejoice in them?
Still live they,
and forever let them last.
Ah, Buckingham,
now do I play the touch
to try if thou be currentgold indeed.
Young Edward lives.
Think now what I wouldspeak.
Say on, my loving lord.
Why, Buckingham, I say Iwould be king,
Why, so you are, mythrice-renowned lord.
Am I king?
'Tis so.
But Edward lives.
True, noble prince.
A bitter consequence thatEdward still should live:
"True, noble prince."
Cousin, thou wast not wontto be so dull.
Shall I be plain?
I wish the bastards dead,
and I would have itsuddenly performed.
What sayest thou now?
Speak suddenly. Be brief.
Your grace may do yourpleasure.
Tut, tut, thou art allice.
Thy kindness freezeth.
Say, have I thy consentthat they shall die?
Give me some littlebreath,
some pause, dear lord,
before I positively speakof this.
I will resolve you hereinpresently.
The king is angry.
See, he gnaws his lip.
I will converse withiron-witted fools andunrespective boys.
None are for me that look intome with considerate eyes.
High-reaching Buckinghamgrows circumspect.
Boy.
My lord.
Knowest thou not any whomcorrupting gold
will tempt unto a closeexploit of death?
I know a discontentedgentleman
whose humble means matchnot his haughty spirit.
Gold were as good astwenty orators
and will, no doubt, tempthim to any thing.
What is his name?
His name, my lord, isTyrrel.
I partly know the man.
Go, call him hither.
The deep-revolving wittyBuckingham
no more shall be theneighbor to my counsels.
Hath he so long held outwith me untired,
and stops he now forbreath?
Well, be it so.
How now, Lord Stanley,what's the news?
Know, my loving lord,
the marquis Dorset, as Ihear, is fled to Richmond,
in the parts where heabides.
Come hither, Catesby.
Rumor it abroad that Anne,my wife,
is very grievous sick.
I will take order for herkeeping close.
Inquire me out somemean-poor gentleman
whom I will marry straightto Clarence' daughter.
The boy is foolish, and Ifear not him.
Look how thou dreamest.
I say again,
give out that Anne my queenis sick and like to die.
About it, for it stands memuch upon
to stop all hopes whosegrowth may damage me.
I must be married to mybrother's daughter,
or else my kingdom standson brittle glass.
Murder her brothers, andthen marry her:
uncertain way of gain.
But I am in so far in bloodthat sin will pluck on sin.
Tear-falling pity dwellsnot in this eye.
Is thy name Tyrrel?
James Tyrrel, and yourmost obedient subject.
Art thou, indeed?
Prove me, my graciouslord.
Darest thou resolve tokill a friend of mine?
Please you, but I hadrather kill two enemies.
Why, then thou hast it.
Two deep enemies,
foes to my rest and mysweet sleep's disturbers
are they that I would havethee deal upon.
Tyrrel, I mean thosebastards in the Tower.
Let me have open means tocome to them,
and soon I'll rid you fromthe fear of them.
Thou singest sweet music.
Hark, come hither, Tyrrel.
Go by this token.
Rise and lend thine ear.
There is no more but so.
Say it is done,
and I will love thee andprefer thee for it.
I will dispatch itstraight.
My lord, I have consideredin my mind
the late request that youdid sound me in.
Well, let that rest.
Dorset is fled toRichmond.
I hear the news, my lord.
Stanley, he is your wife'sson.
Well, look unto it.
My lord, I claim the gift,my due by promise,
for which your honor andyour faith is pawned:
the earldom of Hereford
and the movables which youhave promised I shallpossess.
Stanley, look to yourwife.
If she convey letters toRichmond, you shall answer it.
What says your highness tomy just demand?
I do remember me, Henry VIdid prophesy
that Richmond should beking
when Richmond was a littlepeevish boy.
A king, perhaps, perhaps--
My lord.
How chance the prophetcould not at that timehave told me,
I being by, that I shouldkill him?
My lord, your promise forthe earldom--
Richmond.
When last I was at Exeter,
the mayor in courtesyshowed me the castle there
and called it Rougemont,
at which name I started
because a bard of Irelandtold me once
I should not live longafter I saw Richmond.
My lord.
Aye, what's't o'clock?
I am thus bold
to put your grace in mindof what you promised me.
Well, but what's'to'clock?
Upon the stroke of ten.
Then let it strike.
Why let it strike?
Because that like a jackthou keepest the stroke
between thy begging and mymeditation.
I am not in the givingvein today.
May it please you toresolve me my suit.
Thou troublest me.
I am not in the vein.
And is it thus?
Repays he my deep service
with such contempt?
Made I him king for this?
O, let me think onHastings and be gone
to Brecknock while myfearful head is on.
The tyrannous and bloodyact is done,
the most arch deed ofpiteous massacre
that ever yet this landwas guilty of.
Dighton and Forrest,
who I did suborn to do thispiece of ruthless butchery,
albeit they were fleshedvillains, bloody dogs,
melted with tenderness andmild compassion,
wept like two children intheir deaths' sad story.
"Oh, thus" quoth Dighton,"lay the gentle babes."
"Thus, thus," quothForrest,
"girdling one anotherwithin their alabaster,innocent arms.
"Their lips were four redroses on a stalk
"and in their summerbeauty, kissed each other.
"A book of prayers ontheir pillow lay,
"which once," quoth Forrest,"almost changed my mind,
but O! The devil!"
There the villain stoppedwhen Dighton thus told on:
"We smothered the mostreplenished sweet workof nature
that from the primecreation e'er she framed."
Hence both are gone...
with conscience andremorse.
They could not speak.
And so I left them both
to bear this tidings tothe bloody king.
And here he comes.
All health, my sovereignlord.
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy inthy news?
If to have done the thingyou gave in charge
beget your happiness,
be happy then, for it isdone.
But didst thou see themdead?
I did, my lord.
And buried, gentle Tyrrel?
The chaplain of the Towerhath buried them,
but where, to say thetruth, I do not know.
Come to me, Tyrrel, soonat after supper,
when thou shalt tell theprocess of their death.
Meantime, but think how Imay do thee good
and be inheritor of thydesire.
Farewell till then.
I humbly take my leave.
The son of Clarence have Ipent up close.
His daughter meanly have Imatched in marriage.
The sons of Edward sleepin Abraham's bosom,
and Anne my wife hath bidthis world good night.
Now, for I know the BretonRichmond
aims at young Elizabeth,my brother's daughter,
and by that knot looksproudly on the crown,
to her go I, a jollythriving wooer.
My lord?
Good or bad news, thatthou comest in so bluntly?
Bad news, my lord.
Ely is fled to Richmond,
and Buckingham, backedwith the hardy Welshmen,
is in the field, and stillhis power increaseth.
Ely with Richmond troublesme more near
than Buckingham and hisrash-levied strength.
Come, I have learned thatfearful commenting
is leaden servitor to dulldelay.
Go, muster men.
My counsel is my shield.
We must be brief whentraitors brave the field.
So now prosperity beginsto mellow
and drop into the rottenmouth of death.
Here in these confines,slyly have I lurked
to watch the waning ofmine enemies.
O, a dire induction am Iwitness to
and will to France,
hoping the consequencewill prove
as bitter, black, andtragical.
Withdraw thee, wretchedMargaret.
Who comes here?
Ah, my poor princes.
Ah, my tender babes,
my unblown flowers,new-appearing sweets.
If yet your gentle soulsfly in the air
and be not fixed in doomperpetual,
hover about me with yourairy wings
and hear your mother'slamentation.
Hover about her.
Say that right for right
hath dimmed your infantmorn to aged night.
So many miseries havecrazed my voice
that my woe-wearied tongueis still and mute.
Edward Plantagenet, whyart thou dead?
Plantagenet doth quitPlantagenet.
Edward for Edward pays adying debt.
Wilt thou, O God, fly fromsuch gentle lambs
and throw them in theentrails of the wolf?
When didst thou sleep whensuch a deed was done?
When holy Harry died andmy sweet son.
Dead life, blind sight,
poor mortal living ghost.
Woe's scene, world'sshame,
grave's due by lifeusurped,
brief abstract and recordof tedious days,
rest thy unrest onEngland's lawful earth,
unlawfully made drunk withinnocent blood.
Ah, that thou wouldst assoon afford a grave
as thou canst yield amelancholy seat.
Then would I hide mybones, not rest them here.
O, who hath any cause tomourn but we?
If ancient sorrow be mostreverend,
give mine the benefit ofseniory
and let my griefs frown onthe upper hand.
If sorrow can admitsociety,
tell o'er your woes againby viewing mine.
I had an Edward till aRichard killed him.
I had a husband till aRichard killed him.
Thou hadst an Edward tilla Richard killed him.
Thou hadst a Richard tilla Richard killed him.
I had a Richard too, andthou didst kill him.
I had a Rutland too; thouholp'st to kill him.
Thou hadst a Clarence too,and Richard killed him.
From forth the kennel ofthy womb
hath crept a hell-hound thatdoth hunt us all to death.
That dog that had histeeth before his eyes
to worry lambs and laptheir gentle blood,
that excellent grandtyrant of the earth
that reigns in galled eyesof weeping souls,
that foul defacer of God'shandiwork
thy womb let loose tochase us to our graves.
O upright, just, andtrue-disposing God,
how do I thank thee thatthis carnal cur
preys on the issue of hismother's body
and makes her pew fellowwith others' moan.
O Harry's wife, triumphnot in my woes.
God witness with me; Ihave wept for thine.
Bear with me.
I am hungry for revenge,
and now I cloy me withbeholding it.
Thy Edward, he is dead,that killed my Edward,
thy other Edward dead toquit my Edward.
Young York, he is butboot,
because both they matchnot the high perfection ofmy loss.
Thy Clarence, he is dead,that stabbed my Edward.
And to the beholders ofthat frantic play,
the adulterate Hastings,Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
untimely smothered intheir dusky graves.
Richard yet lives.
Hell's black intelligencer
only reserved their factor
to buy souls and send themthither.
But at hand,
at hand ensues his piteousand unpitied end.
Earth gapes, hell burns,fiends roar, saints pray
to have him suddenlyconveyed from hence.
Cancel his bond of life,dear God, I pray,
that I may live and saythe dog is dead!
O, thou didst prophesy thetime would come
that I should wish forthee to help me curse
that bottled spider, thatfoul, bunch-backed toad.
I called thee then vainflourish of my fortune.
I called thee then poorshadow, painted queen,
the presentation of butwhat I was,
the flattering index of adireful pageant,
one heaved ahigh to behurled down below,
a mother only mocked withtwo fair babes,
a dream of what thou wast,
a garish flag to be the aimof every dangerous shot,
a queen in jest, only tofill the scene.
Where is thy husband now?
Where be thy brothers?
Where are thy two sons?
Wherein dost thou joy?
Who sues and kneels andsays "God save the queen"?
Where be the bending peersthat flattered thee?
Where be the throngingtroops that followed thee?
Decline all this, and seewhat now thou art.
For happy wife, a mostdistressed widow.
For joyful mother, onethat wails the name.
For one being sued to, onethat humbly sues.
For queen, a very caitivecrowned with care.
For she that scorned at menow scorned of me.
For she being feared ofall now fearing one.
For she commanding all,obeyed of none.
Thus hath the course ofjustice whirled about
and left thee but a veryprey to time,
having no more but thoughtof what thou wast
to torture thee the more,being what thou art.
Thou didst usurp my place.
Dost thou not usurp the justproportion of my sorrow?
Now thy proud neck bearshalf my burdened yoke
from which even here Islip my wearied head
and leave the burden of itall on thee.
Farewell, York's wife
and queen of sadmischance.
O, these English woes shallmake me smile in France.
O, thou well-skilled incurses, stay awhile,
and teach me how to cursemine enemies.
Forbear to sleep thenights and fast the days.
Compare dead happinesswith living woe.
Think that thy babes weresweeter than they were
and he that slew themfouler than he is.
Bettering thy loss willmake the bad causer worse.
Revolving this will teachthee how to curse.
My words are dull!
O, quicken them withthine.
Thy woes will make themsharp and pierce like mine.
Why should calamity befull of words?
Windy attorneys to theirclients' woes,
poor breathing orators ofmiseries,
let them have scope.
Though what they willimpart help nothing else,
yet do they ease theheart.
If so, then be nottongue-tied.
Go with me,
and in the breath ofbitter words,
let's smother my damnedson
that thy two sweet sonssmothered.
The trumpet sounds.
Be copious in exclaims.
Who intercepts me in myexpedition?
O, she that might haveintercepted thee
by strangling thee in heraccursed womb
from all the slaughters,wretch, that thou hast done.
Tell me, thou villain slave,where are my children?
Thou toad, thou toad,where is thy brotherClarence
and little NedPlantagenet, his son?
Where is the gentleRivers, Vaughan, Grey?
Where is kind Hastings?
A flourish, trumpets!
Strike alarum, drums!
Let not the heavens hearthese tell-tale women
rail on the Lord'sanointed.
Strike, I say!
Either be patient andentreat me fair,
or with the clamorousreport of war,
thus will I drown yourexclamations.
Art thou my son?
Aye, I thank God, myfather, and yourself.
Then patiently hear myimpatience.
Madam, I have a touch ofyour condition
that cannot brook theaccent of reproof.
O, let me speak.
Do then, but I'll nothear.
I will be mild and gentlein my words.
And brief, good mother,for I am in haste.
Art thou so hasty?
I have stayed for thee,God knows,
in torment and in agony.
And came I not at last tocomfort you?
No, by the holy rood, thouknow'st it well.
Thou camest on earth tomake the earth my Hell.
A grievous burden was thybirth to me.
Tetchy and wayward was thyinfancy,
thy schooldays frightful,desperate, wild, and furious,
thy prime of manhood daring,bold, and venturous,
thy age confirmed, proud,subtle, sly, and bloody,
more mild but yet moreharmful, kind in hatred.
If I be so disgracious inyour eye,
let me march on and notoffend you, madam.
Strike up the drum!
I prithee, hear me speak.
You speak too bitterly.
Hear me a word,
for I shall never speak tothee again.
So.
Either thou wilt die byGod's just ordinance,
ere from this war thouturn a conqueror,
or I with grief andextreme age shall perish
and nevermore behold thyface again.
Therefore, take with theemy most grievous curse,
which in the day ofbattle, tire thee more
than all the completearmor that thou wearest.
My prayers on the adverseparty fight.
And there the little soulsof Edward's children
whisper the spirits ofthine enemies
and promise them successand victory.
Bloody thou art; bloodywill be thy end.
Shame serves thy life anddoth thy death attend.
Though far more cause,
yet much less spirit tocurse abides in me.
I say amen to her.
Stay, madam.
I must talk a word withyou.
I have no more sons of theroyal blood for thee toslaughter.
For my daughters, Richard,
they shall be prayingnuns, not weeping queens,
and therefore level not tohit their lives.
You have a daughter calledElizabeth,
virtuous and fair, royaland gracious.
And must she die for this?
O, let her live,
and I'll corrupt hermanners, stain her beauty,
slander myself as false toEdward's bed,
throw over her the veil ofinfamy.
So she may live unscarredof bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was notEdward's daughter.
Wrong not her birth; sheis a royal princess.
To save her life, I'll sayshe is not so.
Her life is safest only inher birth.
And only in that safetydied her brothers.
Lo, at their birth, goodstars were opposite.
No, to their lives illfriends were contrary.
All unavoided is the doomof destiny.
True, when avoided gracemakes destiny.
My babes were destined toa fairer death
if grace had blessed theewith a fairer life.
You speak as if that I hadslain my cousins.
Cousins, indeed, and bytheir uncle,
cozened of comfort, kingdom,kindred, freedom, life!
Whose hand soever lancedtheir tender hearts,
thy head, all indirectly,gave direction.
No doubt the murderousknife was dull and blunt
till it was whetted on thystone-hard heart
to revel in the entrailsof my lambs.
But that still use of griefmakes wild grief tame,
my tongue should to thineears not name my boys
till that my nails wereanchored in thine eyes.
And I, in such a desperatebay of death,
like a poor bark of sailsand tackling reft,
rush all to pieces on thyrocky bosom.
Madam, so thrive I in myenterprise
and dangerous success ofbloody wars
as I intend more good toyou and yours
than ever you or yours byme were harmed.
What good is covered withthe face of Heaven
to be discovered that cando me good?
The advancement of yourchildren, gentle lady.
Up to some scaffold, thereto lose their heads?
Unto the dignity andheight of fortune,
the high imperial type ofthis earth's glory.
Flatter my sorrow withreport of it.
Tell me, what state, whathonor, what dignity
canst thou demise to anychild of mine?
Even all I have.
Aye, and myself and all
will I withal endow achild of thine
so in the lethe of thyangry soul,
thou drown the sadremembrance of those wrongs
which thou supposest Ihave done to thee.
Be brief, lest that theprocess of thy kindness
last longer telling thanthy kindness' date.
Then know that from mysoul, I love thy daughter.
My daughter's motherthinks it with her soul.
What do you think?
That thou dost love mydaughter from thy soul.
So from thy soul's love didstthou love her brothers,
and from my heart's love,I do thank thee for it.
Be not so hasty toconfound my meaning.
I mean that with my soul,I love thy daughter
and do intend to make herqueen of England.
Well, then, who dost thoumean shall be her king?
Even he that makes herqueen; who else should be?
What, thou?
Even so. How think you ofit?
How canst thou woo her?
That would I learn of you,
as one being bestacquainted with her humor.
And wilt thou learn of me?
Madam, with all my heart.
Send to her by the manthat slew her brothers
a pair of bleeding hearts.
Thereon engrave Edward andYork.
Then haply will she weep.
Therefore present to her--
as sometimes Margaret didto thy father,
steeped in Rutland'sblood--
a handkerchief, which, sayto her,
did drain the purple sap fromher sweet brother's body,
and bid her wipe herweeping eyes withal.
If this inducement moveher not to love,
send her a letter of thynoble deed.
Tell her thou madest away
her uncle Clarence, heruncle Rivers,
aye, and, for her sake,
mad'st quick conveyancewith her good aunt Anne.
You mock me, madam?
This is not the way to winyour daughter.
There is no other way,
unless thou couldst put onsome other shape
and not be Richard thathath done all this.
Say that I did all thisfor love of her.
Nay, then indeed she cannotchoose but hate thee,
having bought love withsuch a bloody spoil!
Look, what is done cannotbe now amended!
Men shall deal unadvisedlysometimes,
which after hours, givesleisure to repent.
If I did take the kingdomfrom your sons,
to make amends, I'll giveit to your daughter.
If I have killed the issueof your womb,
to quicken your increase,
I will beget mine issue ofyour blood upon your daughter.
A grandam's name is littleless in love
than is the doting titleof a mother.
They are as children butone step below,
even of your mettle, ofyour very blood.
Of all one pain, save fora night of groans enduredof her,
for whom you bid likesorrow.
Your children werevexation to your youth,
but mine shall be acomfort to your age.
The loss you have is but ason being king,
and by that loss, yourdaughter is made queen.
I cannot make you whatamends I would.
Therefore, accept suchkindness as I can.
Dorset, your son, thatwith a fearful soul
leads discontented stepsin foreign soil,
this fair alliance quicklyshall call home
to high promotions andgreat dignity.
The king, that calls yourbeauteous daughter wife,
familiarly shall call thyDorset brother.
Again shall you be motherto a king
and all the ruins ofdistressful times repaired
with doubled riches ofcontent.
What?
We have many goodly daysto see.
The liquid drops of tearsthat you have shed
shall come again,transformed to Orient pearl,
advantaging their loanwith interest
of ten times double gainof happiness.
Go then, my mother.
To thy daughter go.
Make bold her bashful yearswith your experience.
Prepare her ears to hear awooer's tale
put in her tender heart
the aspiring flame ofgolden sovereignty.
Acquaint the princess
with the sweet silenthours of marriage joys,
and when this arm of mine hathchastised the petty rebel,
dull-brained Buckingham,
bound with triumphantgarlands will I come
and lead thy daughter to aconqueror's bed,
to whom I will retail myconquest won,
and she shall be solevictress, Caesar's Caesar.
What were I best to say?
Her father's brother wouldbe her lord?
Or shall I say her uncle?
Or he that slew herbrothers and her uncles?
Under what title shall Iwoo for thee
that God, the law, myhonor, and her love,
can make seem pleasing toher tender years?
Infer fair England's peaceby this alliance.
Which she shall purchasewith still-lasting war.
Tell her the king that maycommand entreats.
That at her hands whichthe king's king forbids.
Say she shall be a highand mighty queen.
To veil a title, as hermother doth.
Say I will love hereverlastingly.
But how long shall thattitle "ever" last?
Sweetly in force unto herfair life's end.
But how long fairly shallher sweet life last?
As long as heaven andnature lengthens it.
As long as Hell andRichard likes of it.
Say, I, her sovereign, amher subject love.
But she, your subject,loathes such sovereignty.
Be eloquent in my behalfto her.
An honest tale speeds bestbeing plainly told.
Then plainly to her, tellher my loving tale.
Plain and not honest istoo harsh a style.
Your reasons are tooshallow and too quick!
O no, my reasons are toodeep and dead.
Too deep and dead, poorinfants, in their grave.
Harp not on that string,madam.
That is past.
Harp on it still shall Itill heartstrings break.
Now, by my George, mygarter, and my crown--
Profaned, dishonored, andthe third, usurped.
I swear--
By nothing, for this is nooath.
Thy George, profaned, hathlost his holy honor.
Thy garter, blemished,pawned his knightly virtue.
Thy crown, usurped,disgraced his kingly glory.
If something thou wouldstswear to be believed,
swear then by somethingthat thou hast not wronged.
Now, by the world--
'Tis full of thy foulwrongs.
My father's death--
Thy life hath itdishonored.
Then by myself--
Thyself is self misused.
Why, then, by God.
God's wrong is most ofall!
If thou didst fear tobreak an oath with God,
the unity the king myhusband made,
thou hadst not broken normy brothers died.
If thou hadst feared tobreak an oath with Him,
the imperial metalcircling now thy head
had graced the tendertemples of my child,
and both the princes hadbeen breathing here,
which now, two tenderbedfellows for dust,
thy broken faith hath madethe prey for worms.
What canst thou swear bynow?
The time to come.
That thou hast wronged inthe time o'erpast.
For I myself have many tearsto wash hereafter time
for times past wronged bythee.
The children live whosefathers thou hast slaughtered,
ungoverned youth, to wailit in their age.
The parents live whosechildren thou hast butchered,
old barren plants, to wailit with their age.
Swear not by time to come,
for that thou hast misusedere used
by times ill usedo'erpast!
As I intend to prosper andrepent,
so thrive I in my dangerousaffairs of hostile arms.
Myself, myself confound.
God and fortune bar mehappy hours.
Day, yield me not thylight nor night, thy rest.
Be opposite, all planets ofgood luck, to my proceeding
if, with dear heart'slove, immaculate devotion,
holy thoughts, I tendernot your beauteous,princely daughter.
In her consists myhappiness and thine.
Without her, follows tomyself and thee,
herself, the land, andmany a Christian soul,
death, desolation, ruin,and decay.
It cannot be avoided butby this.
It will not be avoided butby this.
Therefore, dear mother-- Imust call you so--
be the attorney of my loveto her.
Plead what I will be, notwhat I have been.
Not my deserts, but what Iwill deserve.
Urge the necessity andstate of times,
and be not peevish foundin great designs.
Shall I be tempted of thedevil thus?
Aye, if the devil temptyou to do good.
Shall I forget myself tobe myself?
Aye, if yourself'sremembrance wrong yourself.
Yet thou didst kill mychildren.
But in your daughter'swomb, I bury them,
where, in that nest ofspicery,
they will breed selves ofthemselves,
to your recomforture.
Shall I go win my daughterto thy will?
And be a happy mother bythe deed.
I go.
Write to me very shortly,
and you shall understandfrom me her mind.
Bear her my true love'skiss.
And so, farewell.
Relenting fool andshallow, changing woman.
How now. What news?
Mighty sovereign, on thewestern coast
rideth a puissant navy.
To our shores throng manydoubtful hollow-heartedfriends,
unarmed and unresolved tobeat them back.
'Tis thought that Richmondis their admiral.
And there they hull,expecting but the aid ofBuckingham
to welcome them ashore.
Some light-foot friend postto the duke of Norfolk:
Ratcliffe, thyself, orCatesby.
Where is he?
Here, my lord.
Catesby, fly to the duke.
I will, my lord, with allconvenient haste.
Ratcliffe, come hither.
Post to Salisbury.
When thou comest thither--
Dull, unmindful villain,
why stayest thou here andgoest not to the duke?
First, mighty liege, tellme your highness' pleasure,
what from your grace Ishall deliver to him.
O true, good Catesby.
Bid him levy straight
the greatest strength andpower that he can make
and meet me suddenly atSalisbury.
I go.
What may it please youshall I do at Salisbury?
Why, what wouldst thou dothere before I go?
Your highness told me Ishould post before.
My mind is changed.
Stanley, what news withyou?
None good, my liege, toplease you with the hearing,
nor none so bad but wellmay be reported.
Hoyday, a riddle.
Neither good nor bad.
What needest thou run somany miles about,
when thou mayest tell thytale the nearest way?
Once more, what news?
Richmond is on the seas.
There let him sink, and bethe seas on him.
White-livered runagate!
What doth he there?
I know not, mightysovereign, but by guess.
Well, as you guess.
Stirred up by Dorset,Buckingham, and Ely,
he makes for England, hereto claim the crown.
Is the chair empty?
Is the sword unswayed?
Is the king dead, theempire unpossessed?
What heir of York is therealive but we?
And who is England's kingbut great York's heir?
Then tell me, what makeshe upon the seas?
Unless for that, my liege,I cannot guess.
Unless for that he comesto be your liege,
you cannot guess whereforethe Welshman comes.
Thou wilt revolt and flyto him, I fear.
No, my good lord.
Therefore mistrust me not.
Where is thy power, then,to beat him back?
Where be thy tenants andthy followers?
Are they not now upon thewestern shore,
safe-conducting the rebelsfrom their ships?
No, my good lord.
My friends are in thenorth.
Cold friends to me!
What do they in the north,
when they should serve theirsovereign in the west?
They have not beencommanded, mighty king.
Pleaseth your majesty togive me leave,
I'll muster up my friendsand meet your grace
where and what time yourmajesty shall please.
Aye.
Aye, thou wouldst be goneto join with Richmond.
But I'll not trust thee.
Most mighty sovereign,
you have no cause to holdmy friendship doubtful.
I never was nor never willbe false.
Go then and muster men.
But leave behind your son,George Stanley.
Look your heart be firm,
or else his head'sassurance is but frail.
So deal with him as Iprove true to you.
My gracious sovereign...
now in Devonshire, as I byfriends am well advertised,
Sir Edward Courtney andthe haughty prelate,
bishop of Exeter, hiselder brother,
with many moreconfederates, are in arms.
My liege, in Kent, theGuildfords are in arms.
And every hour, morecompetitors flock to therebels,
and their power growsstrong.
My lord, the army of greatBuckingham--
Out on you, owls!
Nothing but songs ofdeath?
There, take thou that tillthou bring better news.
The news I have to tellyour majesty
is that by sudden floodsand fall of waters,
Buckingham's army isdispersed and scattered
and he himself wandered awayalone, no man knows whither.
I cry thee mercy.
There is my purse to curethat blow of thine.
Hath any well-advisedfriend proclaimed reward
to him that brings thetraitor in?
Such proclamation hathbeen made, my lord.
Sir Thomas Lovel and LordMarquis Dorset,
'tis said, my liege, inYorkshire are in arms.
But this good comfortbring I to your highness:
the Breton navy isdispersed by tempest!
Richmond in Dorsetshire sentout a boat unto the shore
to ask those on the banks
if they were hisassistants, yea or no.
Who answered him, theycame from Buckingham,
upon his party.
He, mistrusting them,hoist sail
and made his course againfor Brittany.
March on, march on, sincewe are up in arms,
if not to fight withforeign enemies,
yet to beat down theserebels here at home.
My liege! The Duke ofBuckingham is taken!
That is the best news.
That the Earl of Richmond
is with a mighty powerlanded at Milford
is colder tidings, yetthey must be told.
Away toward Salisbury.
While we reason here,
a royal battle might bewon and lost.
Someone take order
that Buckingham be broughtto Salisbury.
The rest march on with me!
Sir Christopher, tellRichmond this from me:
that in the sty of themost deadly boar,
my son George Stanley isfranked up in hold.
If I revolt, off goesyoung George's head.
'Tis fear of that holdsoff my present aid.
So get thee gone.
Commend me to thy lord.
Withal, say that the queenhath heartily consented
he should espouseElizabeth, her daughter.
But tell me, where isprincely Richmond now?
At Pembroke or atHarford-west in Wales
with many other of greatname and worth,
and towards London do theybend their power
if by the way, they be notfought withal.
O, hie thee to thy lord.
I kiss his hand.
My letter will resolve himof my mind.
Farewell.